---
layout: default
title: I. Factual Background 
parent: MATERIALS IN SUPPORT OF H. RES. 24, IMPEACHING DONALD JOHN TRUMP, PRESIDENT OF THE UNITED STATES, FOR HIGH CRIMES AND MISDEMEANORS 
grand_parent: Government 
nav_order: 97911199902  
---
<style>
.dont-break-out {
  /* These are technically the same, but use both */
  overflow-wrap: break-word;
  word-wrap: break-word;

  -ms-word-break: break-all;
  /* This is the dangerous one in WebKit, as it breaks things wherever */
  word-break: break-all;
  /* Instead use this non-standard one: */
  word-break: break-word;
}
</style>

<div class="dont-break-out" markdown="1">
This is the mobile-friendly web version of the [original article](https://judiciary.house.gov/uploadedfiles/house_judiciary_committee_report_-_materials_in_support_of_h._res._24.pdf).

1. TOC
{:toc}

### I. Factual Background
The events surrounding the impeachable conduct occurred in plain sight, unfolded in real time, and demonstrate unequivocally that President Trump incited an insurrection that did harm to our national interest. President’s Trump conduct on January 6, 2021 was not an isolated event. It spanned months, escalating after it became clear that he lost his bid for re-election, and culminating in the final rallying cry immediately preceding the insurrection that occurred. President Trump continued this course of conduct while the violence was ongoing and has, since that time, shown no remorse.

On the basis of these facts, it is indisputable that President Trump committed “high Crimes and Misdemeanors.” The evidentiary record available to date bearing on this conduct is set forth in the Appendix.

#### A. Conduct Leading Up to January 6, 2021
In the months leading up to January 6, 2021 President Trump engaged in a course of conduct designed to encourage and provoke his supporters to gather in Washington, D.C. and obstruct the process of the electoral votes that would confirm his defeat. That conduct spanned months and included frivolous and harassing lawsuits, direct threats to state and local officials, and false public statements to his supporters, all in an effort to incite his supporters into believing it was their patriotic duty to attack Congress and prevent the peaceful transition of power.

In the aftermath of the 2020 election, President Trump took aggressive steps to overturn its outcome and undermine public confidence in the results. The President and his allies filed sixty- two separate lawsuits across federal and state courts contesting every aspect of the election.1 Every single lawsuit was dismissed, with the exception of one in Pennsylvania regarding ballot curing, and, even there, the court ruling did not in any way change the outcome of the election results in that state.2 The President and those associated with him continue to press their increasingly baseless claims long after their factual and legal contentions had been repeatedly dismissed. These frivolous lawsuits were used by President Trump and his allies, not to identify legitimate concerns, but to undermine confidence in the results of the election, spread dangerous disinformation, and stoke false and wild conspiracy theories.

President Trump also asked his own Justice Department and the Federal Bureau of Investigation to investigate allegations of election fraud in an effort to change the outcome. At his direction, Attorney General William P. Barr authorized prosecutors “‘to pursue substantial allegations of voting and vote tabulation irregularities prior to the certification of elections in your jurisdictions in certain cases,’ particularly where the outcome of an election could be affected.”3

That effort, too, failed. On November 13th, 2020, Assistant U.S. Attorneys in fifteen different federal court districts urged the Attorney General to cease investigations into “vote tabulation irregularities,” based on a lack of evidence of “any substantial anomalies.”4 These officials further explained that, in the places where they served as district election officers, there was no evidence of the kind of fraud that Attorney General Barr’s memo had highlighted and the “policy change was not based in fact.”5 In other words, there was no basis to investigate fraud in the election. Although the Attorney General pursued other investigations into the election results at the President’s direction for some time, he ultimately confirmed on December 1, 2020 that “the U.S. Justice Department had uncovered no evidence of widespread voter fraud that could change the outcome of the 2020 election.”6

Despite the across-the-board failure of the President’s attempted lawsuits, and the lack of any meaningful evidence of fraud uncovered after multiple investigations by both DOJ and the FBI, President Trump still continued—without any evidentiary basis—to spread disinformation that he had won the election. This was part of his ongoing attempt to subvert its results, even urging public officials to “find the fraud” and threatening them if they failed to do so.

President Trump was especially fixated on Georgia. After Election Day, the state of Georgia’s county canvass results showed that President Trump lost the election in Georgia by approximately 14,000 votes.7 After an audit, the tally showed that President Trump had lost Georgia by more than 12,000 votes. As permitted by Georgia law, the Trump campaign requested a recount.8

Under Georgia law, the Secretary of State was required to certify the results of the election on November 20, 2020, and the governor was then required to promptly certify the appointment of a slate of presidential electors in accordance with the election results. President Trump publicly exhorted both men not to do so. Secretary of State Brad Raffensperger nevertheless proceeded to certify the results on November 20, 2020, and Georgia Governor Brian Kemp duly certified the appointment of a slate of electors that same day.9 The recount requested by the Trump campaign, which proceeded in parallel, was performed electronically pursuant to state law.10 After the recount, the vote count remained materially unchanged; Georgia recertified the election result on December 7, 2020.11

The final tally showed that President Trump lost the State of Georgia by 11,779 votes.12 Georgia’s slate of presidential electors then duly cast their votes on December 14, 2020, in accordance with the Electoral Count Act of 1887. During the post-election period, the Trump campaign and supporters of President Trump filed at least seven lawsuits in Georgia courts seeking to overturn the result in Georgia or otherwise challenge the conduct of the election, all of which were dismissed either by the court or voluntarily by the plaintiff.13

Throughout this process, President Trump publicly and privately attempted to impede Georgia officials. He disparaged Governor Kemp and Secretary of State Raffensperger for months, at one point calling the latter an “enemy of the people” for refusing to overturn the election.14 Among other attempts, as reported on December 23, 2020, President Trump called one of Georgia’s lead investigators, urging him to “find the fraud” and claiming that the official would be a “national hero” if he did so.15 In addition, President Trump placed inappropriate pressure on the Office of the U.S. Attorney for the Northern District of Georgia.16 U.S. Attorney Byung J. Pak abruptly resigned on January 5, 2020. It has since been reported that Mr. Pak was told by White House officials he needed to resign because the President was “furious” that Mr. Pak was not pursuing the President’s groundless claims of widespread voter fraud in Georgia.17

On January 2, 2021, President Trump called Georgia state officials, including Secretary Raffensperger, in yet another attempt to reverse the outcome in that state. During the call, which was recorded by Mr. Raffensperger’s office, President Trump directly urged Mr. Raffensperger to “find” enough votes to overturn the state’s results and threatened him with criminal penalties if he failed to do so. Specifically, President Trump stated:

> [The Georgia ballots are totally] illegal — it is more illegal for you than it is for them because, you know, what they did and you’re not reporting it. That’s a criminal, that’s a criminal offense. And you can’t let that happen. That’s a big risk to you and to Ryan, your lawyer. And that’s a big risk. But they are shredding ballots, in my opinion, based on what I’ve heard. And they are removing machinery, and they’re moving it as fast as they can, both of which are criminal finds. And you can’t let it happen, and you are letting it happen. You know, I mean, I’m notifying you that you’re letting it happen. So look. All I want to do is this. I just want to find 11,780 votes, which is one more than we have because we won the state.18

While waging this pressure campaign against public officials, President Trump also spread inflammatory and inaccurate claims that he won the election on his social media and in his public appearances, all as part of his effort to subvert and obstruct the election outcome. For example, on December 13th, President Trump tweeted false claims that he had won the election “overwhelmingly” and that Democrats had committed “massive” fraud, stating in full:

> The RINOS that run the state voting apparatus have caused us this problem of allowing the Democrats to so blatantly cheat in their attempt to steal the election, which we won overwhelmingly. How dare they allow this massive and ridiculous Mail-In Voting to occur... [...] ...Tens of millions of haphazardly ballots sent, with some people getting two, three, or four ballots. We will never give up!19

These public statements—espousing false theories of election fraud that had already been rejected by his own Justice Department—continued to escalate over the coming weeks. On December 18th, for example, President Trump urged his supporters and Republican Senators to “get tougher,” tweeting “[w]e won the Presidential Election, by a lot. FIGHT FOR IT! Don’t let them take it away,” and adding on December 22nd “[t]he truth is we won the election by a landslide. We won it big.”20 The next week, President Trump falsely tweeted that the “United States had more votes than it had people voting, by a lot. This travesty cannot be allowed to stand. It was a Rigged Election, one not even fit for third world countries!”21

President Trump focused specifically on January 6, 2021. His messaging included a specific call to action: “Come to D.C. January 6th to ‘StopTheSteal.’” On December 19th, for example, he tweeted: “Statistically impossible to have lost the 2020 Election. Big protest in D.C. on January 6th. ... Be there, will be wild!”22 He maintained this focus in the following weeks, including tweeting on January 1st “The BIG Protest Rally in Washington, D.C. will take place at 11:00 A.M. on January 6th. Locational details to follow. StopTheSteal!”23; the President even confirmed his own presence on that date, stating “I will be there! Historic day.”24

In the days leading up to January 6th, President Trump escalated further, encouraging his supporters not just to show up in D.C., but specifically to obstruct the electoral count and the peaceful transition of power. On January 4th, for example, President Trump told his supporters at a Georgia rally: “Democrats are trying to steal the White House ... [y]ou can’t let it happen. You can't let it happen,” and that “[T]hey’re not taking this White House. We’re going to fight like hell, I’ll tell you right now.“25 And the day prior, President Trump further provoked his supporters by tweeting, among other comments, “Washington is being inundated with people who don’t want to see an election victory stolen by emboldened Radical Left Democrats. Our Country has had enough, they won’t take it anymore!26

President Trump also began to spread the false claim that Vice President Pence had the unilateral authority to reject the results of the Electoral College, claiming, “If Mike Pence does the right thing we win the election ... we become president and you are the happiest people. ... Mike Pence is going to have to come through for us and if he doesn’t, it’s a sad day for our country.”27 To enhance pressure on his Vice President, President Trump repeatedly attacked him publicly and privately as disloyal for failing to take unconstitutional measures to alter the election outcome.28

As President Trump ramped up his rhetoric and false claims, his supporters were led to believe that the democratic process posed a threat to the country and required intervention.

#### B. The January 6, 2021 “Save America Rally”
By January 6th, President Trump had succeeded in creating a tinder box of thousands of supporters, riled up and ready to obstruct the electoral count if Vice President Pence refused to undertake unconstitutional action in his role as Presiding Officer at the Joint Session. In fact, the President tweeted twelve times on the morning of January 6th, continuing to spread false claims that the election was “rigged,” and encouraging his supporters to “fight” and “be strong.”29 President Trump also urged Vice President Pence to act illegally before the electoral count began, tweeting at 8:17 AM on the morning of January 6, 2021, “States want to correct their votes, which they now know were based on irregularities and fraud, plus corrupt process never received legislative approval. All Mike Pence has to do is send them back to the States, AND WE WIN. Do it Mike, this is a time for extreme courage!”30

President Trump had also already scheduled a rally for the day that Congress was assembled to finalize the election results, set up within walking distance of the Capitol, dubbed the “Save America Rally.” The title and location of the rally further underscored the President’s messaging to his supporters that it was their patriotic duty to stop the electoral count.

The Save America Rally commenced at approximately 9:00 AM.31 Shortly before the President spoke, his attorney Rudy Giuliani reiterated the President’s false claims that the 2020 presidential election was not a “clean election,” and ended by urging the crowd to “have trial by combat.”32 The President’s son, Donald Trump Jr., also spoke, warning Republican congressmembers who did not support his father that “we’re coming for you.”33

At approximately 11:57 AM, the President addressed the crowd for over an hour, concluding at roughly 1:11 PM.34 The President falsely insisted yet again that Democrats had “stolen” the election, and that his supporters instead should “fight much harder” to “stop the steal” and “take back our country” at the Capitol.35 Although at one point he suggested that those marching to the Capitol should do so “peacefully,” the overall tenor of his speech was menacing— and, as subsequent events showed, was understood by his supporters as such.

The President also continued to insist that Vice President Pence act to overturn the election on his behalf: “All Vice-President Pence has to do is send it back to the States to recertify, and we become president, and you are the happiest people. . . . Mike Pence, I hope you’re going to stand up for the good of our Constitution and for the good of our country. And if you’re not, I’m going to be very disappointed in you. I will tell you right now. I’m not hearing good stories.”36

The President even called out specific legislators, warning these elected officials to help in his efforts to overturn the election results or face consequences. Among other comments, he stated: “And we’ve got to get rid of the weak congresspeople, the ones that aren’t any good, the Liz Cheney’s of the world, we got to get rid of them.”37 His speech, in full, added additional such warnings, false claims, and encouragement to his supporters to take action, including the following:

> All of us here today do not want to see our election victory stolen by [sic] bold and radical left Democrats which is what they are doing and stolen by the fake news media. That is what they have done and what they are doing. We will never give up. We will never concede. It doesn’t happen. You don’t concede when there’s theft involved. ... Our country has had enough. We will not take it anymore, and that is what this is all about. ... And to use a favorite term that all of you people really came up with, we will stop the steal. ... We will not let them silence your voices. We’re not going to let it happen. 

> But just remember this, you’re stronger, you’re smarter. You've got more going than
anybody and they try and demean everybody having to do with us and you're the real
people. You’re the people that built this nation. You’re not the people that tore down our nation. ... Republicans are constantly fighting like a boxer with his hands tied behind his back. It’s like a boxer. And we want to be so nice. We want to be so respectful of
everybody, including bad people. We’re going to have to fight much harder and Mike
Pence is going to have to come through for us. If he doesn’t, that will be a sad day for our
country because you’re sworn to uphold our constitution. Now it is up to Congress to
confront this egregious assault on our democracy.

> After this, we’re going to walk down and I’ll be there with you. We’re going to walk down.
Anyone you want, but I think right here, we’re going to walk down to the Capitol--And
we're going to cheer on our brave senators and congressmen and women and we’re
probably not going to be cheering so much for some of them. Because you'll never take
back our country with weakness. You have to show strength and you have to be strong.

> . . . I said something is wrong here, something is really wrong, can’t have happened and
we fight, we fight like hell, and if you don't fight like hell you're not going to have a
country anymore. ... [W]e are going to try--give our Republicans, the weak ones because
the strong ones don't need any of our help, we’re try--going to try and give them the kind of pride and boldness that they need to take back our country. So let’s walk down Pennsylvania Avenue. 38

While President Trump was speaking, Vice President Pence issued a public letter in which he made clear that he would follow the Constitution and the law despite President Trump’s urgings to the contrary. “I do not believe,” he wrote, “that the Founders of our country intended to invest the vice president with unilateral authority to decide which electoral votes should be counted during the Joint Session of Congress, and no vice president in American history has ever asserted such authority. . . . It is my considered judgment that my oath to support and defend the Constitution constrains me from claiming unilateral authority to determine which electoral votes should be counted and which should not.”39

As soon as President Trump concluded his speech, thousands of attendees marched down Pennsylvania Avenue toward Capitol Hill—just as President Trump had instructed them.

#### C. The Attack on the Capitol
On January 6, at 1:00 PM, as the President’s rally was drawing to a close, the House and the Senate met in a Joint Session of Congress, with the Vice President presiding, to count the Electoral College’s votes for who “shall be the President. ” as required by the Twelfth Amendment and the Electoral Count Act.40 By around 2:00 PM, the supporters attending the rally had surged toward the Capitol and were attempting to breach its security barriers, requiring the Capitol Police to issue a number of security orders including one at 2:03 PM ordering an internal relocation of those in the Cannon House Office Building.41

At 2:02 PM, less than an hour after the President concluded his speech, reports confirmed that his supporters were attempting to breach the Capitol itself.42 Within minutes, Members of the House and Senate were told that the Capitol was in lockdown and were alerted to stay away from doors and windows.43 By 2:07 PM, the mob had breached the steps on the east side of the Capitol and, minutes later, were inside the Capitol itself.44 From that time, the insurrectionists desecrated the Capitol including by, among other acts, ransacking and looting Member offices, stealing and destroying electronics, government property, and sensitive materials, and engaging in violence, which eventually resulted in at least five deaths. The following is a summary of these acts as recounted in criminal complaints, eyewitness experiences, and firsthand photographs and videos of the events.

To enter the Capitol, the insurrectionists overwhelmed Capitol Police, scaled walls, used makeshift ladders, shattered windows, and overran barricades.45 Although Capitol Police locked the gallery and floor doors and Members and staff barricaded themselves in offices, the mob stormed Member offices, vandalizing and smashing property, overturning furniture, and, in some cases, stealing electronics.46 The day after the attack, the Justice Department noted that the thefts “could have potential national security equities.”47 The full impact of hundreds of violent rioters with smartphones rampaging unsupervised in the Capitol, with direct access to electronics, computers, and networks, is not yet known.

Insurrectionists also severely damaged the building itself. They left bullet marks in the building walls, looted art, destroyed monuments, including a commemorative display honoring late congressman John Lewis, smeared their feces in several hallways, and fatally injured a Capitol Police officer.48 Several brandished the Confederate battle flag and extremist paraphernalia.49

By approximately 2:45 PM, insurrectionists had breached the House and Senate floors and began posing for photographs, including on the dais where Vice President Mike Pence had been presiding just moments before.50 Other images showed rioters smoking marijuana in Capitol rooms.51 The insurrectionists had, among their gear and weaponry, bullet-proof vests, zip ties used for handcuffs, metal knuckles, sticks and poles, knives, and firearms; in total, at least six handguns were recovered from subsequent arrests.52 Videos confirmed that these insurrectionists were openly threatening specific Members of Congress. For example, some of the attackers said, “Tell Pelosi we’re coming for that [expletive].”53

Members of this mob also made clear that they attacked the Capitol because they believed the President had directed them to. One, individual, Jacob Chansley, who wore a “bearskin headdress” and “carried a spear, approximately 6 feet in length,”54 later told police that he came as part of a group effort at the request of the President.55 Another, Derrick Evans, had posted on social media at 12:08 AM on January 6th that he was going to D.C. to “#StopTheSteal,” in response to the President’s tweet.56 Similarly, a livestream video from inside the Capitol revealed an insurrectionist explaining, “[o]ur president wants us here. ... We wait and take orders from our president.”57

Outside, the mob erected a gallows, disabled police vehicles, and left threatening messages to Members.58 Police discovered in a nearby pickup truck—which was later found to belong to one of the President’s supporters traveling from Alabama59—eleven “mason jars containing an unknown liquid,” “cloth rags,” and “lighters,” which appeared to be “consistent with components for an explosive or incendiary device known as a ‘Molotov Cocktail.’”60 The truck additionally contained a black handgun and an M4 carabine assault rifle with loaded ammunition magazines.61 The Capitol Police Hazardous Materials Response Team also confirmed two devices that were “hazardous and could cause great harm to public safety” near the Capitol, and further reports confirmed a “hooded figure with a pipe bomb.”62

Over 50 police officers were injured while defending the Capitol. In one instance, President Trump’s supporters grabbed a police officer by the helmet and dragged him down the stairs. Others “kicked and punched the officer, and one man even bashed the prone figure repeatedly with a pole flying an American flag.”63 One officer, Brian Sicknick, died the following day from injuries suffered during the attack.64 As of January 10th, at least 90 had been arrested, with more arrests expected. 65

In the midst of this violence, the Secret Service evacuated Vice President Pence from the Senate floor, and Capitol Police attempted to evacuate or safely secure Members of Congress and their staff. Members were instructed to remove their identification pins in order to avoid targeted attacks. Gas masks were dispersed, and Members were ordered to shelter in place, instructed to stay under their desks or lie face down on the floor for their protection, or escorted by armed Capitol Police out of the building.66

Members have spoken publicly about the harrowing experience.67 Representative Jamie Raskin asked his chief of staff to “protect [two of his visiting family members] with her life,” as she stood guard at the door clutching a fire iron.68 Representative Jason Crow, said that he had not been in a similar situation since serving in Afghanistan and described the chaos on the House floor: “[T]he police weren’t able to get us out so they actually closed and locked the doors and started to take furniture and barricade the doors and the windows with furniture as the mob tried to ram them down and was breaking through the windows.”69 Representative Susan Wild, described hearing gun shots at approximately 3:00 PM and then Capitol Police screaming “Get down! Get down!”, as she crawled on her hands and knees through the gallery, witnessing her colleagues making phone calls to loved ones.70 Representative Dan Kildee described in real-time what was happening, “I am in the House Chambers. We have been instructed to lie down on the floor and put on our gas masks. Chamber security and Capitol Police have their guns drawn as protesters bang on the front door of the chamber.”71

Other Members also described the confusion and chaos as the siege closed in on the House floor. Representative Pramila Jayapal recounted how “Capitol police with us seemed very confused about who had the key to the doors. They were closed, but we weren’t sure if they were locked, and we were yelling, “Lock the doors! Lock the doors!”72 We heard shots being fired, presumably into the chamber.” She noted that took more than an hour and half for Members sitting in the gallery to evacuate: “Before we knew it, everyone on the floor below us had been removed, and ... we were still there. And it didn’t look like anyone was coming to get us.”73

Many Members and staff were left traumatized by the experience. Representative Nancy Mace “felt unsafe returning to her hotel. What if rioters, who had just stormed and overtaken the Capitol building, were staying at her hotel? ... She’d spent Wednesday huddled in someone’s corner office, then stuck in a tunnel, then hunkered in her office with the lights off, her children texting her with worry.”74

#### D. President Trump’s Response to the Insurrection
Although the insurrection began immediately following the conclusion of his speech, President Trump did not swiftly denounce the violence, or order his supporters to lay down their arms. To the contrary, as he watched the violence unfold on television, President Trump was reportedly “borderline enthusiastic because it meant the certification was being derailed.”75 President Trump’s reaction “genuinely freaked people out.”76 Senator Ben Sasse relayed a conversation with senior White House officials that President Trump was “walking around the White House confused about why other people on his team weren’t as excited as he was as you had rioters pushing against Capitol Police trying to get into the building.”77 He was “delighted.”78

And while the Senators were in lockdown, President Trump called Senator Mike Lee— apparently trying to reach Senator Tommy Tuberville instead. The President did so not to check the Senators’ well-being or assess the security threats, but instead, like the mob itself, to disrupt the peaceful transition of power.79 He encouraged Senator Tuberville to object and delay further the counting of electoral votes.80

The President’s public statements were no better. Rather than defend the Capitol, comfort the American people, or urge his supporters to stand down, at the start of the siege, he retweeted at 1:49 PM a video of the rally, which included his previous statements that: “our country has had enough. We will not take it anymore and that’s what this is all about. To use a favorite term that all of you came up with, we will stop the steal. . . You’ll never take back our country with weakness. You have to show strength, and you have to be strong.”81

By 2:20 PM, the nation saw on live television that the armed mob had overrun the Capitol, causing both the House and the Senate to recess prematurely82 and flee their respective chambers in fear of their lives. Yet, even then, the President continued to affirm the insurrection’s mission by attacking Vice President Pence for refusing to obstruct the process, tweeting at 2:24 PM:

> Mike Pence didn’t have the courage to do what should have been done to protect our Country and our Constitution, giving States a chance to certify a corrected set of facts, not the fraudulent or inaccurate ones which they were asked to previously certify. USA demands the truth!83

Later video would emerge of insurrectionists inside the Capitol chanting “Hang Mike Pence!”84

The insurrectionists also made clear that they intended to harm House Speaker Nancy Pelosi. Some yelled, “Tell Pelosi we’re coming for that [expletive].”85 Others roamed the Capitol halls chanting menacingly, “Where’s Nancy? Where’s Nancy?”86

Around this time, Members of the House and Senate from both parties confirmed that they had privately asked—or were publicly urging—the President to mobilize the National Guard and order his supporters to cease the violence and leave the Capitol.87 For example, House Minority Leader Kevin McCarthy confirmed that he had “already talked to the President” on the phone and said: “I think we need to make a statement. Make sure that we can calm individuals down.”88 Former New Jersey Governor Chris Christie elaborated, the “[P]resident caused this protest to occur. He’s the only one that can make it stop. ... [W]hat the president has said is not good enough. The President has to come out and tell his supporters to leave the capitol grounds.”89 Representative Mike Gallagher also tweeted during the Capitol occupation, “Mr. President. You have got to stop this. You are the only person who can call this off.”90 Similarly, Mick Mulvaney, the President’s former Acting Chief of Staff, tweeted, “The President’s tweet is not enough. He can stop this now and needs to do exactly that. Tell these folks to go home.”91 After reaching out to Ivanka Trump, Senator Graham said the President’s aides “were all trying to get him to speak out, to tell everyone to leave.”92 Even the President’s Chief of Staff Mark Meadows was prompted to speak to him after aides said, “They are going to kill people.”93

Not until 4:17 PM—over two hours after the initial breach and well into the siege—did the President release a scripted, pre-recorded video, which included a call for “peace” and “law and order” and finally told his supporters “you have to go home now.” That video, though, continued to reiterate his claims of election fraud, stating that the election was “stolen from us.” Moreover, the President included a clear message of support and love for these insurrectionists, who were still wreaking destruction inside the Capitol building, saying, “we love you, you’re very special.” President Trump told the insurrectionists:

> I know your pain. I know you’re hurt. We had an election that was stolen from us. It was a landslide election and everyone knows it, especially the other side. But you have to go home now. We have to have peace. We have to have law and order. ... So go home. We love you, you’re very special. ... I know how you feel. But go home and go home in peace.94

Despite the President’s belatedly released video, the insurrection continued. In fact, the Capitol building was not secured until 5:34 PM, and Congress did not continue counting electoral votes until 8:00 PM.95

By the time the Capitol was secured and counting resumed, four of the insurrectionists have died. One was shot by Capitol Police as she tried to climb through a window in order to gain access to the House chamber, and three succumbed to medical emergencies suffered during the attack.96 In addition, it was widely reported that many Capitol Police Officers had been injured by insurrectionist attacks, one of whom would die the following day.97 Yet, at 6:01 PM, in the aftermath of this devastation, President Trump’s statement to the public was not a condemnation of the violence. Rather, it was a message that justified his supporters’ actions and reiterated his lies about the election. He tweeted: “These are the things and events that happen when a sacred landslide election victory is so unceremoniously & viciously stripped away from great patriots who have been badly & unfairly treated for so long,”98 ending with: “Remember this day forever!”99

#### E. The Events of January 6th Were a Result of and Incited by the President’s Course of Conduct

The timeline of events demonstrates that President Trump encouraged and incited the violent and seditious acts that occurred. Moreover, the lawlessness that resulted from President Trump’s conduct was entirely foreseeable by the President.

President Trump openly acknowledged, in advance of the insurrection, that his statements had incited huge crowds to descend on D.C. On the eve of the event, President Trump publicly tweeted:

> Washington is being inundated with people who don’t want to see an election victory stolen by emboldened Radical Left Democrats. Our Country has had enough, they won’t take it anymore! We hear you (and love you) from the Oval Office. MAKE AMERICA GREAT AGAIN... I hope the Democrats, and even more importantly, the weak and ineffective RINO section of the Republican Party, are looking at the thousands of people pouring into D.C. They won’t stand for a landslide election victory to be stolen. @senatemajldr @JohnCornyn @SenJohnThune.100

In the days prior to the event, President Trump had likewise acknowledged his awareness of the masses gathered as a result of his prior statements. For example, in response to the President’s tweet encouraging his supporters to come to D.C. on January 6th, a supporter confirmed, “[t]he calvary [sic] is coming, Mr. President!”, to which President Trump responded directly: “A great honor!”101 And, in response to reports that crowds were “descending” upon D.C., the President wrote: “we hear you (and love you) from the Oval Office.”102

Moreover, President Trump had every reason to know that, incited by his statements, the thousands of people pouring into D.C. would engage in actual violence. As early as December 1st, elected officials warned President Trump of the consequences of his rhetoric. For example, Gabriel Sterling, an elected official in Georgia, cautioned President Trump regarding his public statements spreading false claims about the election: “Mr. President . . . Stop inspiring people to commit potential acts of violence. Someone’s going to get hurt, someone’s going to get shot, someone’s going to get killed.”103

In the days leading up to the January 6th rally, it was widely reported that militia groups, the Proud Boys—a group the President told to “stand back and stand by” during a presidential debate—and others Trump supporters had posted pictures with weaponry that they planned to bring to the Rally and use to storm and occupy the Capitol.104

For example, a member of the Red-State Secession group on Facebook posted on January 5, 2021: “If you are not prepared to use force to defend civilization, then be prepared to accept barbarism,” to which dozens of people posted comments, including pictures of weaponry that they planned to bring to the President’s rally on January 6th.105

In another thread on thedonald.win, responding to the President’s tweets, discussion included how to most effectively sneak guns into Washington, including one individual writing: “Yes, it’s illegal, but this is war and we’re clearly in a post-legal phase of our society.”106

One supporter wrote out an exact blueprint for the events that unfolded: “But on Jan 6, remember. . .Capital Building/Halls of Congress is ground zero. Jump the lines. Cross the roadblocks. Push past the robo cops. Don't let them usher/kettle us to any other “symbolic” monument. IMPORTANT. They need to hear our roar inside the chambers before the [expletive] begins.”107 Another wrote: “The capitol is our goal. Everything else is a distraction. Every corrupt member of congress locked in one room and surrounded by real Americans is an opportunity that will never present itself again.”108 Supporters even predicted that the President would not deploy the National Guard, allowing them to ambush the Capitol Police: “[Trump] can order the NAT guard to stand down if needed. unfortunately he has no control over the Capitol Police... but there are only around 2k of them and a lot are useless fat asses or girls.”109

Whether or not President Trump was aware of these specific posts, it was widely reported and understood within the federal government that the crowd planning to attending the Save America Rally included many individuals who were armed, dangerous, and prepared to carry out violence. Indeed, the day before the rally, several people were even arrested, including on weapons-related charges, for assaulting a police officer and simple assault.110 One such arrest was the leader of the Proud Boys for destroying a church’s “Black Lives Matter” banner at an earlier pro-Trump post-election rally.111 These arrests and reports prompted D.C. Mayor Muriel Bowser to caution residents to avoid the rally, even mobilizing city police.112

In short, this was no ordinary political event and everyone, including the President and his own administration officials, knew it. The insurrectionists responded directly to specific calls to action by the President, repeated and amplified over weeks and weeks. Indeed, the Associated Press reported that “many of the rioters had taken to social media after the November election to retweet and parrot false claims by Trump that the vote had been stolen in a vast international conspiracy. Several had openly threatened violence against Democrats and Republicans they considered insufficiently loyal to the president.”113

As the President’s former Chief of Staff John Kelly explained on January 7th, “You know, the president knows who he’s talking to when he tweets or when he makes statements. He knows who he’s talking to. He knows what he wants them to do. And the fact that he said the things, he has been saying the things he has been saying since the election, and encouraging people, no surprise, again, at what happened yesterday.”114 Kelly added that, were he a member of the Cabinet, he would invoke the 25th Amendment to make the Vice President Pence the acting president.115

